And I was born here in Laredo, Webb County, Texas.
My father is the late Mercury Martinez, who is
originally from San Ignacio, Zapata County,
Texas. And my mother came from the old town of
Guerrero, Tamaulipas, Mexico. And her name was
Cristina Treveño.
You would like to have a little information about
my father. About your father. All
right. Yes, I'd like to know more about your
father. Perhaps you could just begin with a short
account of his life as you know it. Well, my
father... was the son of Proceso Martinez, who
married one of the original descendants of the
original settlers of the old town of San Ignacio in
Zapata County, Texas, by the name of Maria Jesus
Uribe, who was the daughter of Don Jesus Uribe.
My grandfather used to be a merchant. It is said
that he was the one that originally introduced the
plow and also the lantern into this South Texas
area at that time by the fact that he was a merchant
and brought in many of these things. Prior to that
time, all they used were camels.
My father was educated or received his... primary
education in the old town of San Ignacio. And from
there, and against the wishes of his father, Don
Proceso, he decided that he was going to get his
formal schooling by going to Austin, Texas and
registering at St. Edward's University. Why did
his father not want him to do that? Because at that
time, they believed that They had more than enough
work. They believed in the ranch life. And with the
primary schooling that they had was more than
enough. How many years was this? This was about
eight, 10 years of actual schooling that he had
received. So basically against the wishes of his
father, but with the full support of a man that my
father became very close to, and that was Mr. A.M.
Bruni. And Mr. A.M. Bruni guaranteed his
education, or at least if he needed any help, that
he would make sure that he would provide him with
the necessary funds, which he did. And I
understand that after he got his education, my
father was able to repay every penny that he
borrowed from Juan Antonio at the time. But he
decided to go to St. Edward's College, and he was
able to get his what is referred to at that time as
Master of Accounts degree. He graduated in 1898
from St. Edward's College. From there, he came to
San Ignacio, and he started teaching in the old
settlement of Dolores in Zapata County. There he
thought for about 10, 12 years, at which time he
decided to get a little bit more involved in
politics, and he ran for county treasurer, which
he was elected. It was during this time, I
understand, that the elections got so hot that my
father had a prize on his head And they were gunning
for him. Who was gunning for him? Well, some of the
opposing candidates. What party did your father
represent? Well, he represented the party that
was being headed by the old judge, A.P. Spahn. And
it got to the point that whenever he would go to bed,
he would fix his bed in one corner, and after he
would turn off the lamp, he would move his bed to the
opposite corner just in case. And his horse was so
well trained that it would follow him wherever he
would go. And he used to relate one comment or one
little story. He said one time this friend of his
made a bet that if he would go through this
particular house, that the horse wouldn't follow
him. And he took him up on it. So he got off the horse
and went into the main room, which was considered,
you might say, the living room. The horse
followed, went into the dining room, the horse
followed, went into the kitchen, the horse
followed, and on through the kitchen, and the
horse was right behind him. That's how bad
politics was at the time, and he just wanted to make
sure that he had his method of transportation so
he'd need to ride on all of a sudden. Where was he
living during the election? Was he still in
Dolores? He was in San Ignacio at the time. He had
gone to San Ignacio. He had gone to San Ignacio. And
after he got elected, of course, he went and lived
in Zapata, the old town of Zapata. And he was there.
for up until the time that he moved down here to
Laredo, at which time he started working as an
investigator and overall troubleshooter,
including, I would say, bookkeeper, interpreter
for the old law firm of Hicks, Hicks, Dixon, and
Bobbitt. And this was in the 1920s, late 1920s.
I think he still continued to have a very active
role in the local politics, primarily in Zapata
County, and he never really lost touch of it
because people really respected him
considerably. Probably I would imagine the
reason why he loved politics so much is his father
was a county commissioner for 30 years. That was
Don Proceso. And then after Don Proceso retired,
then his son, Proceso Jr., who was younger than my
father, was elected county commissioner. And he
was a county commissioner in Zapata for another 30
years. So I guess this is part of the reason. The
politics was in his blood, and he always lived it.
But he related most interesting times So to go back
to an earlier question, you said that A.M. Bruni
helped him go through college. Now, how did your
father get acquainted with A.M. Bruni? Well, when
Don Antonio first came here from the old country,
from Italy, my father used to buy quite a number of
what we referred to as or skins for Mr. Bruni, who in
turn, Mr. Bruni, would sell further up in the east.
Were these cattle skins? Cattle skins and
primarily cattle skins. And over the years, he was
able to, and again, too, by the fact that my
grandfather was a merchant in San Ignacio. He had a
store in San Ignacio. This was also part of the
friendship that developed over that period of
time. And after my father got out or graduated from
St. Edward's, this relationship continued. And
on a number of occasions, as I mentioned to you a
little earlier, my father was used. He was a
go-between, you might say, to buy land for Tony
Bruni. And this, of course, was done primarily to
keep the original sellers or the original owners
of the land from hiking the prices on that land.
When they found that it was Bruni who was... Who was
the one that was actually interested in buying the
land. Yeah, well, tell the story about Bruni's
land and their extent. Well, my father used to
relate that Mr. Bruni had so much land that a man
would start at the crack of daybreak, crack of
dawn, ride on horseback, which was right on the
edge of the river, and ride out all day long. And
this would be hard riding on horseback. And it'd
get dark, and he would still be riding on Bruny
land. That's how much land A.M. Bruny had
accumulated over his lifetime. As a matter of
fact, when Mr. Bruny died,
my father still had under his name, as you might say
the owner, 5,000 acres of land. And nobody else in
the family of Mr. Bruni knew about the acquisition
of these 5,000 acres of land. But my father was so
honest that after the funeral, he approached my
father, approached the heirs, primarily Antonio
Chico, as he used to refer to. And he told Antonio
Chico, he said, listen, I have 5,000 acres that are
under my name, but do not belong to me. I bought them
with your father's money. And as soon as you have
everything settled, let me know so that I can deed
these 5,000 acres of land over to you and the
family." And this is the type of honesty that he
had. He just was very much what we sometimes refer
to as a straight shooter. And it got to a point,
especially later on, in actual documentation or
knowledge for family trees and land titles that
time and again my father was used to as a witness by
both defense attorneys and counselors he was used
as a key witness and none of the attorneys would
ever challenge whatever he would say, you know,
whenever he came, whenever he was put on the stand
in land matters or land titles, neither party,
neither party of either instance would ever
challenge him because that's how well versed he
was and that's how well respected the respect that
he had from all of the attorneys, because they knew
that whatever he would say was actually the actual
truth. And through his testimony, there were many
land titles that were settled and never
challenged, primarily on his say-so, on his
words. How did he happen to become involved with
this Laredo law firm? Was there an incident that
led to this? The incident that led to this was that
his older brother, who used to have a creamery,
used to have San Andres Dairy at the time. Which
brother was this? This was a brother by the name of
Serafin. Excuse me, not Serafin. It's an older
brother. Adolfo, excuse me. Adolfo Martinez. And
one early morning when he got up to milk the cows,
and he stepped on a puddle. And while he was on the
puddle, he went on to turn the light. So he got
electrocuted. So my father, who was in Zapata at
the time, came over and started doing some
investigation work in order to bring his
findings. And he used the law firm of Hicks, Hicks,
Dixon, and Bobbitt. And the firm was so impressed
in the manner that he conducted this
investigation that Mr. Bobbitt, Judge Bobbitt,
Robert Lee Bobbitt, as a matter of fact, and Yale
Hicks, they offered him a position with the law
firm. Of course, after that, he worked for 20 years
with the law firm. And during this time, he was used
to a great extent to investigate family trees and
land titles. And it was during this time that he got
to learn even more so about names, dates, places,
family trees. And this, to him, was a school in
itself, as he used to make reference. And after
that, there were many people that thought that he
was an attorney, which in fact he was not. But they
would always come to him for all simple wills and
deeds of trust. Well, he was a notary public. He was
a notary public. But he definitely was not an
attorney, even though many people still think
that he was. But he did acquire this association in
the mind of his friends and relatives. That's
right. helped them, apparently, with quite a bit
of legal work. To go back again to some of the early
history, one of the questions that I had was about
your father's first wife, not Guadalupe Uribe,
his second wife. But the first- Maria Uribe, who
was a sister of Guadalupe Uribe. They were both
sisters, and they were first cousins of my father.
And
she died right immediately after childbirth.
There was only one reference. There was one child,
the baby, of course, that died a few weeks later.
And then he married. How long had they been
married? for a relatively short period of time.
Short time. This was the first child. The very
first child. Maria died. I would say probably just
over a year at the most. Did he ever talk about that
at all? Very little. He didn't write it into his
papers either. No. And then he married this other
sister who was the oldest in the family. She was
several years older than he was. Quite a number of
years older.
He was married to her or lived for several years,
quite a number of years. As a matter of fact, they
They were the ones that moved over from Zapata
County to Laredo and built the house on 416
Lincoln. It was in the late 1920s. Do you live there
now? That's where I presently live. At 416
Lincoln. I just wondered. Yes, ma'am. So that's
the mother house, you might say, or the father
house. The father house. And after she died, then
she married my mother. How did he meet your mother?
Well, my mother came from Olzapata to work for my
father because my father, well at the time, that
my aunt Lupita was sick, she was extremely sick, so
she came over to care for her. And after she died, my
aunt Lupita. Your father's second wife. My
father's second wife. Right, okay. And we call her
Tia Lupita. But anyway, this is how the
relationship started. And after she died, then a
short while later, my father married my mother.
Were they also kin? No. Well, probably they were
kin, but there were quite a few distantly related.
Quite a few degrees. In other words, practically
everybody from San Ignacio and Guerrero all
through there is connected in one way or another.
One way or another. The relationship came from the
Gutierrez family because my mother was a
Gutierrez, so. That's where that relationship
came from. And out of that union, only my sister and
I were born. Now, your mother, Christina, had been
married once before, had she not? She had also been
married twice before. But she only had a child from
one of those marriages. And so I have a
half-sister. Where does she live? She's
presently living in Corpus. While I'm thinking
about it, where's Rosa living now? Rosa is living
right across from where I live at 413 Lincoln
Street. Has she married? No. No, she says that
she's not about to support somebody.
She's two years younger than I. At least her
intentions right now are not too bad. What year
were you born? I was born in 1937, July 25. You're
exactly one year younger than I am.
Is that right? All right. Well, let's see. There
were several things that I particularly wanted to
ask. Oh, while I'm thinking about it, I don't have
the date of your father's death. When did he die
exactly? I don't have it with me. And I'm afraid I
cannot. Like I say, I'm not good at dates. But I'll
find out, and I'll be more than happy to tell you
about it. All right. What year was it? 1966. 1966. I
wasn't sure of that either. But you can write me
about it. Just 10 days before he was to complete his
90th year. So he was 89 years old. 89, just 10 days
shy of 90. 90 years old. This was in August. I'm
afraid I can't, I don't recall the date. Well, the
men in your family are notably long-lived. I'm
afraid they are. Judge. The oldest, well, the
latest one that died, let me put it this way, he died
just about a little better than a year almost two
years ago. And he was almost 98 years old when he
died. Which one was that? Who was older? And that
was one of your father's brothers? Brother, who
was older than my father. So it's true. I mean,
they're a strong fiber. You've got good genes for
staying around a long time. Well, back to your
father, after he retired from the law firm, one of
the things he apparently did was work for the
Boundary Commission. Could you tell me a little
bit about the nature of his work with the Boundary
Commission? Well, this was during the time that
the International Boundary and Water Commission
was going to build Lake Falcon. and they needed
somebody that was well-versed with the families
in the affected area that was well-versed with the
titles land titles and also that was well-versed
with the family trees within the area and because
of that and of course by the fact that my father was
already up in years he was already in his 70s They
waived their requirement that they have to go
through for civil service. And he was hired. And he
conducted a considerable amount of
investigation with regards to who should be paid
and the amounts. And he was also the arbiter. He
would come in as far as the settlement of many of the
lands the different families and the different
heirs. And through him, and primarily because of
him, the greater part of all of that acreage was
finally settled. Because he was a type that would
devote a considerable amount of time to detail.
And he was very meticulous and he would trace it all
the way from the original grand tour in order to
prove his point as to who was the original or the
owner that should be paid or that settlement
should be made. Well, in some cases, have these
lands simply not been subdivided? That is
correct. They were still being held in common by
all the descendants? Exactly. And this is where my
father's, I would say, invaluable knowledge came
through. And there was a number of occasions I know
that I myself personally would drive him to many of
these old ranches where he would conduct personal
interviews in order to clear a particular error or
in order to find who the other issues were within
the family. And in his reports, many times he
provided family trees, which he would in turn turn
over to the International Boundary Water
Commission. So his help proved to be invaluable in
trying to make final settlement for the Falcon.
Now how did he feel about the Falcon situation? Do
you remember? He believed in it because he felt
that this would bring in a boom to the area which
Let's face it, the agricultural economic area had
been going down considerably, and he felt that the
lake would provide particularly a tourist
industry, which in effect it has. And
consequently, this is one area that he believed
quite strongly. The only one that he opposed, and
he was able to oppose quite favorably, was the
moving of San Ignacio.
Again, primarily through his efforts, San
Ignacio was left there. And I'm glad that it was,
because all of the original houses, stone houses,
like the old fort where they used to find Indians,
and the original settlements, all of that
definitely has been preserved. And he was the one
that was initially contacted to get the
International Boundary Water Commission and
change its plans, which they did. Now, what was his
particular reason for justifying the salvation
of San Ignacio? Well, to a great extent, of course,
he used the historical interest. And then he used
the surveys that were done by the Boundary
Commission as far as the altitude, which, let's
face it, San Ignacio is in a much higher area, or the
altitude there is much higher than the old Zapata.
So it really wasn't going to be submerged. Not at
all whatsoever. It has never been, not even in the
latest flood, which was in 1954, and it was proven
because it definitely did not reach San Ignacio. I
mean, it was around it, but it didn't get at San
Ignacio. So his point was well taken and well
proven. Now, a lot was said. One of his very
convincing arguments that he's left in his papers
was that the terrible hardship that would be
created by these people if they had to leave the
homes of their ancestors and if they had to give up
their lands that were along the river. Now, this,
of course, was certainly very poignant, and he
also pointed out that many of them might end up
just, you know, going elsewhere, and maybe they
couldn't even make a way for themselves, and he
talked about their independence and this sort of
thing, but to turn this around, this, of course,
was true for San Ignacio, but what about the people
of Old Zapata? Were they as socially disrupted as
He argued the people of San Ignacio would have
been. You must keep in mind that old Zapata had
already been moved about two different times
prior to that. So, in effect, we were not really
talking about the original settlements. Because
prior to that time, there used to be what they would
refer to as the Carrizo. which was later changed to
Zapata. And it was even further downriver. So in
effect, we're not talking about a town that had the
historical meaning that San Ignacio has. And
true, there were some old stone houses there, but
it definitely did not carry the historical
background of San Ignacio. And to this extent,
that's why we really did not carry the impetus or
the catalyst or the influence that San Ignacio now
definitely has. This is the main, main reason why.
There was some talk at the time of putting, or at
least some people in San Ignacio, excuse me, New
Zapata, wanted to put two dams on the Rio Grande
which would lower the level of the lake. Do you
remember where your father stood on that
particular issue? Because they were the two
proposals, one to just keep the level, build a
lower dam and another one upstream and save old
Zapata too. Well, I'm afraid that I don't recall
any comment from him along those lines. Well, that
was rather, that was in the late 1940s. That was a
little earlier. I didn't start really helping him
out until the 1950s when he was actually hired.
Because he was hired by the Boundary Commission in
the 50s, after he already had retired in the 40s
from the law firm of Hicks, Hicks, Hicks, and the
Boundary. Yes, ma'am. So you were in your early
teens. Yes, ma'am. When you were, well, not that
early teens. No, 1953. In 1953. You were 16 or 17.
Just about. I was already in high school at the
time. Well, your father, in his work with the
people down there, did he do anything to make the
transition any easier for them that you recall,
the ones who did have to move? Yes, and because of
his influence and because of the trust that they
had in him, that he was able to influence many of the
people that didn't want to move from their
ranches.
I don't know, I guess... We must keep in mind that my
father, who
most, I mean, they had deep respect for him. And
normally, what he would say, they wouldn't
challenge. Again, his influence was used by the
government to a very great extent, and he was
definitely instrumental in getting many of these
people moved out from their ranches and from their
old settlements.
Well,
he wrote a corrida called The Ballad of Old Zapata,
which is a very beautiful piece of work, full of the
emotional trauma of having to uproot even from old
Zapata. Did he write many other things like this?
He did. And as a matter of fact, I have some
compositions of his over at my home. And I only wish
I had the ability to recite them as well as he did.
But they are written. And he does have them in his
own personal handwriting. And again, that
flavor, that emotion does come through along
those lines. Well, in the difference between
Spanish and English, do you feel that he used the
two different languages differently? True, I
would say so, because, I don't know, there seems to
be a little bit more flavor The adjectives are a
little bit more meaningful in Spanish, and of
course the fact that that's his native tongue, he
had
more... direct contact with that particular
language. Spanish is the first language he
learned. That is correct. When he went to school in
San Ignacio, was education there in English or
Spanish or both? Or do you know? It was mostly in
Spanish. Mostly in Spanish. So they were actually
being taught. Bilingual education is not new.
That's right. At least not as far as he was
concerned. And did he learn some English in school
there, or did he learn English later? Some
English. Some English. Not that much. He really
didn't learn it until he went over to St. Edward's
at Austin. In which language would you say he was
the more fluent? Or was he equally fluent? He was
equally fluent in both because he had the ability,
while reading English, he was reading it, you
might say, how shall I say, silently. But as he was
reading it in, let's say, English, he was actually
saying it out loud in Spanish. And vice versa, he
would read something in Spanish, but he would be
reading it out loud in English. He really was quite
fluent in both, which is something that I never was
able to acquire. I haven't either. But he was quite
instrumental. And I guess that's the reason, too,
why a number of times he was used as a court
interpreter, because he was fluent in both. Well,
what language did you grow up speaking at home?
Spanish. My mother didn't know any English at all,
so all we spoke at home was Spanish. And not until,
well, the The time that we went to school, all my
formal schooling is in English. I never got any
formal education in Spanish. But at home was
strictly Spanish. How did your father, and he was
as I see him, of course, and I'm interpreting him
from his papers, but he strikes me as being a man who
in some ways lived in two worlds, very much a part of
what you might call the Anglo-North American
United States world, also very much a part of what,
of course, was also the United States, but had been
part of Mexico since he was very much a native
Texan, but still one with much more of a
Spanish-Mexican culture. Do you feel like he
synthesized these worlds in his personality, or
did he see them as two different worlds? And I'm
being a little introspective here. That's a hard
question to answer, but I, as far as I was
concerned, he felt very, very much at ease. in the
situation. He was definitely never the type to, I
don't think, he ever felt that he was ever
discriminated, let's say. On the contrary, he
always had their respect, or everybody's
respect, for that matter. They always referred to
him as Don Mercurio, with the utmost respect. Of
course, as far as I was concerned, to me, He was
already quite elderly when I finally gained some
kind of reason. And by that time, of course,
everybody knew him, and he was very well
respected. And regardless of who it was, the
respect always was there, including by my mother,
who used to call him Don Mercurio. Don is being
very... how shall I say, with the utmost respect.
In address of honor. In address of honor. There you
are. Well, is this partly the Laredo situation? Do
you think Laredo is different, say, from other
towns on the border? I would say so. How would you
say it's different? Because I don't,
Laredo, I have never been exposed as such, you
might say, outside of the Laredo, other than the
times that I've been working on my well, former
schooling when I was doing graduate work outside
of Laredo and North Texas and in Colorado and even
in Massachusetts. But
by the fact that we've never been exposed to any
kind of discrimination, we don't look for it. We
don't have a chip on our shoulder, and
consequently, we just don't believe in it.
because we haven't been exposed to it i would
imagine well now do you think that's partly
because of the influence of men like your father in
the early history i'm sure that that is the case you
definitely don't see it here in the right no you
don't see it no not at all and uh this is this is
something this will help me understand your
father better perhaps that this particular
situation in laredo was there any historical
reason that this that it happened this way that
there was a kind of synthesis I would imagine one
time I went into some kind of discussion along
these lines when I told him that I didn't believe in
this discrimination bit. And to as far as I was
concerned, it didn't exist. It still doesn't. And
this individual told me, yes, but you must keep in
mind that your background is entirely different
by the fact that you came from people that
inherited land, that were well-respected, that
had the image of supposedly cultured people. And
consequently, the kind of an attitude that you
received was probably very, very different than
from other families. That might have been the
case. I don't know. So he was arguing that it's your
family situation rather than Laredo itself that
is different. That's what he was arguing. But you
wouldn't agree with that? I definitely do not,
because I know even close friends here that did not
have or does not have the, did not inherit, let's
say, land or things along these lines, and they do
not have that kind of an attitude. It was quite
different in El Paso, and I was surprised. I did not
know that for El Paso, but apparently there was a
tremendous amount of discrimination in El Paso
and directed toward people who were from good
families, so this would tend to support your
argument. What about further down in the valley?
What do you know about those towns, say, to compare
them, in this respect, with Laredo? I'm afraid I
have never been, I've never lived in the valley.
Just going through it, the extent of my knowledge
would be Zapata in Zapata, Texas, and that would be
about as far as that situation is concerned. But
isn't that really part of the Laredo culture, if
you will, Zapata culture? Very much so, with
Laredo. Is this the case? Or with the valley you're
talking about? No, I mean Zapata ties in more with
Laredo. Very, very much. Zapata ties in very
strongly because the greater number of the people
from both of these towns, they came from the old
Guerrero, Tamaulipas, and they're the ones that
settled this area. And including Nuevo Laredo,
too, for that matter. Mm-hmm. And this is probably
the reason why. If the greater number of the people
here, you will find that one way or another they're
related. Or there's some kind of tying in,
probably possibly even by marriage. But at least
there's something that makes a connection
somewhere. Wasn't Bruni's wife from one of the
Spanish families? Yes, ma'am, she was. She
married a local woman. local woman here, and who
was very well respected. That is correct. That's
right. And that was true of Martine? That was true
of Martine, or Martin as they now referred to, who
the present mayor, Mayor J.C. Martin, is one of the
descendants. But all of these people, and by the
way, Mayor J.C. Martin was also, is also a grandson
of A.M.
Again, we come back again to the same families. A
lot of intermarriage. Quite a bit. What about the
new people?
They are very well accepted here in Laredo. And
many people have mentioned this, that Laredo
opens up quite well to the people that move from out
of town, which I think is the case. And we are just
quite friendly. That's a feeling, that to a point,
the greater number of the people, they really get
to love the town here, because within a relatively
short period of time, they get to know most
everybody. And they are greeted on a very friendly
basis. Well, did your father ever talk about his
move to Laredo? Did he ever wish he could move back
to San Ignacio? No. On the contrary, he said that
that was the best blessing that he ever did in
moving down here to Laredo. Because he never sold
his properties in Zapata. He kept them. And he kept
on farming. He had some agriculture out there. It
was dry farming. But he kept on working the land out
there. At the same time, he was able to improve his
financial situation by moving down here to
Loreto. So he definitely was, I would say,
grateful in the sense that he decided to move down.
And he made a good decision. That's the way he felt.
That's the way he felt, because he was able to
acquire a few pieces of property here. He didn't
feel like it was too big a town or anything? No, not
at all. Maybe because of the small-town
atmosphere? No, no, because, like I say, he knew
most everybody, and most everybody knew him. He
was quite well-respected in Laredo. Well, you've
talked about his basic honesty. Do you have any
more, oh, the lots in Zapata? When old Zapata was
moved, you said that he could have acquired more
land than he did. Well, in the old town of Zapata, he
had some very, very choice lots. Some of them that
were right in the heart of the downtown, you might
say, Zapata. And by the fact that he worked with the
International Boundary Water Commission, he
very well could have acquired, along the same
lines, choice properties that surrounded the
courthouse, that were right by the highway. But
yet he decided that he was only going to ask for one
lot and get the proper remuneration for those lots
for the rest to the laws that he had so he definitely
did not or was not the time to take advantage and
this is a basic honesty that he had because that's
the way he believed in now when land was or when the
lots were given in replacement were people given
lots that corresponded to the same position next
to the square as their lots in the old town that this
was the their intent whose idea was this do you know
To a great extent, he was influential there. He
was? Yes, ma'am. Well, I'm very glad. How did he
happen to have this idea? Well, he felt that
you must keep in mind that the old settlements were
normally built around the courthouse and the
square. And the closer you were, naturally, that
was a kind of respect again that you had. It was a
matter of prestige where you lived in relation to
the square, which is very old Spanish and Mexican.
Very much so. Yes. And this is the same influence
that he had as far as trying to do the same thing in
moving to the new town of Zapata. And the
relationship or the distance of these lots was how
far you are from the courthouse. And you will
notice that that's the case over there in the new
town of Zapata. Well, I just wondered if the
government might have had other plans if he hadn't
suggested it. Well, that was a possibility.
Because some of the records indicate that people
in Old Zapata said they would move, they would
exchange their lot if they could have a lot that was
in the same relationship to the square. And he must
have passed this information on and convinced
people how important this was. Oh, very important
to them. It was most important. Do you happen to
know if this was done in New Guerrero? I'm afraid I
don't. I don't have any idea how they worked it out
in New Guerrero. I do know that people are still
living in Old Guerrero that never moved to New
Guerrero. With the flood water? I mean, with the
dam and the lake water? Well, they live in the
higher area of Old Guerrero, and it would be an
interesting tour if you should ever have the time,
because you still see the cobblestone roads
there, and you still see many of the old...